New database schema. We adopted a new schema, which is based on university data, as a running example throughout the book. This schema is
more intuitive and motivating for students than the earlier bank schema, and
illustrates more complex design trade-offs in the database-design chapters.
• More support for a hands-on student experience. To facilitate following
our running example, we list the database schema and the sample relation
instances for our university database together in Appendix A as well as
where they are used in the various regular chapters. In addition, we provide,
on our Web site http://www.db-book.com, SQL data-definition statements for the
entire example, along with SQL statements to create our example relation
instances. This encourages students to run example queries directly on a
database system and to experiment with modifying those queries.
• Revised coverage of E-R model. The E-R diagram notation in Chapter 7 has
been modified to make it more compatible with UML. The chapter also makes
good use of the new university database schema to illustrate more complex
design trade-offs.
• Revised coverage of relational design. Chapter 8 now has a more readable
style, providing an intuitive understanding of functional dependencies and
normalization, before covering functional dependency theory; the theory is
motivated much better as a result.
• Expanded material on application development and security. Chapter 9 has
new material on application development, mirroring rapid changes in the
field. In particular, coverage of security has been expanded, considering its
criticality in today’s interconnected world, with an emphasis on practical
issues over abstract concepts.
• Revised and updated coverage of data storage, indexing and query optimization. Chapter 10 has been updated with new technology, including
expanded coverage of flash memory.
Coverage of B+-trees in Chapter 11 has been revised to reflect practical
implementations, including coverage of bulk loading, and the presentation
has been improved. The B+-tree examples in Chapter 11 have now been
revised with n = 4, to avoid the special case of empty nodes that arises with
the (unrealistic) value of n = 3.
Chapter 13 has new material on advanced query-optimization techniques.
• Revised coverage of transaction management. Chapter 14 provides full coverage of the basics for an introductory course, with advanced details following in Chapters 15 and 16. Chapter 14 has been expanded to cover the practical
issues in transaction management faced by database users and databaseapplication developers. The chapter also includes an expanded overview of
topics covered in Chapters 15 and 16, ensuring that even if Chapters 15 and 16
are omitted, students have a basic knowledge of the concepts of concurrency
control and recovery.
Preface xxi
Chapters 14 and 15 now include detailed coverage of snapshot isolation,
which is widely supported and used today, including coverage of potential
hazards when using it.
Chapter 16 now has a simplified description of basic log-based recovery
leading up to coverage of the ARIES algorithm.
• Revised and expanded coverage of distributed databases. We now cover
cloud data storage, which is gaining significant interest for business applications. Cloud storage offers enterprises opportunities for improved costmanagement and increased storage scalability, particularly for Web-based
applications. We examine those advantages along with the potential drawbacks and risks.
Multidatabases, which were earlier in the advanced transaction processing
chapter, are now covered earlier as part of the distributed database chapter.
• Postponed coverage of object databases and XML. Although object-oriented
languages and XML are widely used outside of databases, their use in databases is still limited, making them appropriate for more advanced courses,
or as supplementary material for an introductory course. These topics have
therefore been moved to later in the book, in Chapters 22 and 23.
• QBE, Microsoft Access, and Datalog in an online appendix. These topics,
which were earlier part of a chapter on “other relational languages,” are now
covered in online Appendix C.
All topics not listed above are updated from the fifth edition, though their overall
organization is relatively unchanged.
Review Material and Exercises
Each chapter has a list of review terms, in addition to a summary, which can help
readers review key topics covered in the chapter.
The exercises are divided into two sets: practice exercises and exercises. The
solutions for the practice exercises are publicly available on the Web site of the
book. Students are encouraged to solve the practice exercises on their own, and
later use the solutions on the Web site to check their own solutions. Solutions
to the other exercises are available only to instructors (see “Instructor’s Note,”
below, for information on how to get the solutions).
Many chapters have a tools section at the end of the chapter that provides
information on software tools related to the topic of the chapter; some of these
tools can be used for laboratory exercises. SQL DDL and sample data for the
university database and other relations used in the exercises are available on the
Web site of the book, and can be used for laboratory exercises.
xxii Preface
Instructor’s Note
The book contains both basic and advanced material, which might not be covered in a single semester. We have marked several sections as advanced, using
the symbol “**”. These sections may be omitted if so desired, without a loss of
continuity. Exercises that are difficult (and can be omitted) are also marked using
the symbol “**”.
It is possible to design courses by using various subsets of the chapters. Some
of the chapters can also be covered in an order different from their order in the
book. We outline some of the possibilities here:
• Chapter 5 (Advanced SQL) can be skipped or deferred to later without loss of
continuity. We expect most courses will cover at least Section 5.1.1 early, as
JDBC is likely to be a useful tool in student projects.
• Chapter 6 (Formal Relational Query Languages) can be covered immediately
after Chapter 2, ahead of SQL. Alternatively, this chapter may be omitted from
an introductory course.
We recommend covering Section 6.1 (relational algebra) if the course also
covers query processing. However, Sections 6.2 and 6.3 can be omitted if
students will not be using relational calculus as part of the course.
• Chapter 7 (E-R Model) can be covered ahead of Chapters 3, 4 and 5 if you so
desire, since Chapter 7 does not have any dependency on SQL.
• Chapter 13 (Query Optimization) can be omitted from an introductory course
without affecting coverage of any other chapter.
• Both our coverage of transaction processing (Chapters 14 through 16) and
our coverage of system architecture (Chapters 17 through 19) consist of an
overview chapter (Chapters 14 and 17, respectively), followed by chapters
with details. You might choose to use Chapters 14 and 17, while omitting
Chapters 15, 16, 18 and 19, if you defer these latter chapters to an advanced
course.
• Chapters 20 and 21, covering data warehousing, data mining, and information retrieval, can be used as self-study material or omitted from an introductory course.
• Chapters 22 (Object-Based Databases), and 23 (XML) can be omitted from an
introductory course.
• Chapters 24 through 26, covering advanced application development, spatial,
temporal and mobile data, and advanced transaction processing, are suitable
for an advanced course or for self-study by students.
• The case-study Chapters 27 through 30 are suitable for self-study by students.
Alternatively, they can be used as an illustration of concepts when the earlier
chapters are presented in class.
Model course syllabi, based on the text, can be found on the Web site of the book.
Preface xxiii
Web Site and Teaching Supplements
A Web site for the book is available at the URL: http://www.db-book.com. The Web
site contains:
• Slides covering all the chapters of the book.
• Answers to the practice exercises.
• The five appendices.
• An up-to-date errata list.
• Laboratory material, including SQL DDL and sample data for the university
schema and other relations used in exercises, and instructions for setting up
and using various database systems and tools.
The following additional material is available only to faculty:
• An instructor manual containing solutions to all exercises in the book.
• A question bank containing extra exercises.
For more information about how to get a copy of the instructor manual and the
question bank, please send electronic mail to customer.service@mcgraw-hill.com.
In the United States, you may call 800-338-3987. The McGraw-Hill Web site for
this book is http://www.mhhe.com/silberschatz.
Contacting Us
We have endeavored to eliminate typos, bugs, and the like from the text. But, as
in new releases of software, bugs almost surely remain; an up-to-date errata list
is accessible from the book’s Web site. We would appreciate it if you would notify
us of any errors or omissions in the book that are not on the current list of errata.
We would be glad to receive suggestions on improvements to the book. We
also welcome any contributions to the book Web site that could be of use to
other readers, such as programming exercises, project suggestions, online labs
and tutorials, and teaching tips.
Email should be addressed to db-book-authors@cs.yale.edu. Any other correspondence should be sent to Avi Silberschatz, Department of Computer Science,
Yale University, 51 Prospect Street, P.O. Box 208285, New Haven, CT 06520-8285
USA.
Acknowledgments
Many people have helped us with this sixth edition, as well as with the previous
five editions from which it is derived.
xxiv Preface
Sixth Edition
• Anastassia Ailamaki, Sailesh Krishnamurthy, Spiros Papadimitriou, and
Bianca Schroeder (Carnegie Mellon University) for writing Chapter 27 describing the PostgreSQL database system.
• Hakan Jakobsson (Oracle), for writing Chapter 28 on the Oracle database
system.
• Sriram Padmanabhan (IBM), for writing Chapter 29 describing the IBM DB2
database system.
• Sameet Agarwal, Jose A. Blakeley, Thierry D’Hers, Gerald Hinson, Dirk My- ´
ers, Vaqar Pirzada, Bill Ramos, Balaji Rathakrishnan, Michael Rys, Florian
Waas, and Michael Zwilling (all of Microsoft) for writing Chapter 30 describing the Microsoft SQL Server database system, and in particular Jose´
Blakeley for coordinating and editing the chapter; Cesar Galindo-Legaria, ´
Goetz Graefe, Kalen Delaney, and Thomas Casey (all of Microsoft) for their
contributions to the previous edition of the Microsoft SQL Server chapter.
• Daniel Abadi for reviewing the table of contents of the fifth edition and
helping with the new organization.
• Steve Dolins, University of Florida; Rolando Fernanez, George Washington
University; Frantisek Franek, McMaster University; Latifur Khan, University
of Texas - Dallas; Sanjay Madria, University of Missouri - Rolla; Aris Ouksel,
University of Illinois; and Richard Snodgrass, University of Waterloo; who
served as reviewers of the book and whose comments helped us greatly in
formulating this sixth edition.
• Judi Paige for her help in generating figures and presentation slides.
• Mark Wogahn for making sure that the software to produce the book, including LaTeX macros and fonts, worked properly.
• N. L. Sarda for feedback that helped us improve several chapters, in particular
Chapter 11; Vikram Pudi for motivating us to replace the earlier bank schema;
and Shetal Shah for feedback on several chapters.
• Students at Yale, Lehigh, and IIT Bombay, for their comments on the fifth
edition, as well as on preprints of the sixth edition.
Previous Editions
• Chen Li and Sharad Mehrotra for providing material on JDBC and security
for the fifth edition.
• Marilyn Turnamian and Nandprasad Joshi provided secretarial assistance for
the fifth edition, and Marilyn also prepared an early draft of the cover design
for the fifth edition.
Preface xxv
• Lyn Dupre copyedited the third edition and Sara Strandtman edited the text ´
of the third edition.
• Nilesh Dalvi, Sumit Sanghai, Gaurav Bhalotia, Arvind Hulgeri K. V. Raghavan, Prateek Kapadia, Sara Strandtman, Greg Speegle, and Dawn Bezviner
helped to prepare the instructor’s manual for earlier editions.
• The idea of using ships as part of the cover concept was originally suggested
to us by Bruce Stephan.
• The following people pointed out errors in the fifth edition: Alex Coman,
Ravindra Guravannavar, Arvind Hulgeri, Rohit Kulshreshtha, Sang-Won
Lee, Joe H. C. Lu, Alex N. Napitupulu, H. K. Park, Jian Pei, Fernando Saenz
Perez, Donnie Pinkston, Yma Pinto, Rajarshi Rakshit, Sandeep Satpal, Amon
Seagull, Barry Soroka, Praveen Ranjan Srivastava, Hans Svensson, Moritz
Wiese, and Eyob Delele Yirdaw.
• The following people offered suggestions and comments for the fifth and earlier editions of the book. R. B. Abhyankar, Hani Abu-Salem, Jamel R. Alsabbagh, Raj Ashar, Don Batory, Phil Bernhard, Christian Breimann, Gavin M.
Bierman, Janek Bogucki, Haran Boral, Paul Bourgeois, Phil Bohannon, Robert
Brazile, Yuri Breitbart, Ramzi Bualuan, Michael Carey, Soumen Chakrabarti,
Tom Chappell, Zhengxin Chen, Y. C. Chin, Jan Chomicki, Laurens Damen,
Prasanna Dhandapani, Qin Ding, Valentin Dinu, J. Edwards, Christos Faloutsos, Homma Farian, Alan Fekete, Frantisek Franek, Shashi Gadia, Hector
Garcia-Molina, Goetz Graefe, Jim Gray, Le Gruenwald, Eitan M. Gurari,
William Hankley, Bruce Hillyer, Ron Hitchens, Chad Hogg, Arvind Hulgeri,
Yannis Ioannidis, Zheng Jiaping, Randy M. Kaplan, Graham J. L. Kemp, Rami
Khouri, Hyoung-Joo Kim, Won Kim, Henry Korth (father of Henry F.), Carol
Kroll, Hae Choon Lee, Sang-Won Lee, Irwin Levinstein, Mark Llewellyn,
Gary Lindstrom, Ling Liu, Dave Maier, Keith Marzullo, Marty Maskarinec,
Fletcher Mattox, Sharad Mehrotra, Jim Melton, Alberto Mendelzon, Ami
Motro, Bhagirath Narahari, Yiu-Kai Dennis Ng, Thanh-Duy Nguyen, Anil
Nigam, Cyril Orji, Meral Ozsoyoglu, D. B. Phatak, Juan Altmayer Pizzorno,
Bruce Porter, Sunil Prabhakar, Jim Peterson, K. V. Raghavan, Nahid Rahman,
Rajarshi Rakshit, Krithi Ramamritham, Mike Reiter, Greg Riccardi, Odinaldo
Rodriguez, Mark Roth, Marek Rusinkiewicz, Michael Rys, Sunita Sarawagi,
N. L. Sarda, Patrick Schmid, Nikhil Sethi, S. Seshadri, Stewart Shen, Shashi
Shekhar, Amit Sheth, Max Smolens, Nandit Soparkar, Greg Speegle, Jeff
Storey, Dilys Thomas, Prem Thomas, Tim Wahls, Anita Whitehall, Christopher Wilson, Marianne Winslett, Weining Zhang, and Liu Zhenming.
Book Production
The publisher was Raghu Srinivasan. The developmental editor was Melinda
D. Bilecki. The project manager was Melissa Leick. The marketing manager was
xxvi Preface
Curt Reynolds. The production supervisor was Laura Fuller. The book designer
was Brenda Rolwes. The cover designer was Studio Montage, St. Louis, Missouri.
The copyeditor was George Watson. The proofreader was Kevin Campbell. The
freelance indexer was Tobiah Waldron. The Aptara team consisted of Raman
Arora and Sudeshna Nandy
Personal Notes
Sudarshan would like to acknowledge his wife, Sita, for her love and support,
and children Madhur and Advaith for their love and joie de vivre. Hank would
like to acknowledge his wife, Joan, and his children, Abby and Joe, for their love
and understanding. Avi would like to acknowledge Valerie for her love, patience,
and support during the revision of this book.
A. S.
H. F. K.
S. S.
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
A database-management system (DBMS) is a collection of interrelated data and
a set of programs to access those data. The collection of data, usually referred to
as the database, contains information relevant to an enterprise. The primary goal
of a DBMS is to provide a way to store and retrieve database information that is
both convenient and efficient.
Database systems are designed to manage large bodies of information. Management of data involves both defining structures for storage of information
and providing mechanisms for the manipulation of information. In addition, the
database system must ensure the safety of the information stored, despite system
crashes or attempts at unauthorized access. If data are to be shared among several
users, the system must avoid possible anomalous results.
Because information is so important in most organizations, computer scientists have developed a large body of concepts and techniques for managing data.
These concepts and techniques form the focus of this book. This chapter briefly
introduces the principles of database systems.
1.1 Database-System Applications
Databases are widely used. Here are some representative applications:
• Enterprise Information
◦ Sales: For customer, product, and purchase information.
◦ Accounting: For payments, receipts, account balances, assets and other
accounting information.
◦ Human resources: For information about employees, salaries, payroll taxes,
and benefits, and for generation of paychecks.
◦ Manufacturing: For management of the supply chain and for tracking production of items in factories, inventories of items in warehouses and stores,
and orders for items.
